 Concept of Programming in Java

Class and Object Assignments

Q1.Create a class Date which has below data members
int day,month,year.
Write below methods for the class.
1.Constructor
2.Setter methods setDay(),setMonth(),setYear()
3.toString method for the date class
Create another class TestDate which will have main() method and creates three date objects.
try all combinations of calling setter and getter functions and observe the outputs.

Q2.
create a class Employee with data fields as empid,name,salary

Write below methods for the class.
1.Constructor
2.getter and setter
3.toString() method to print all data members 
4.also write method public void getBonus(int atesal)  which calculates the bonus as per below conditions
if salary is > 15000 then give bonus of 20% of salary
 else no bonus should be printed 
create 3 different objects of the Employee class and then call all methods.


Q3.Assignment in Java: Basic statements and expressions
Write a Java program to convert Centigrade to Fahrenheit 
    Fahr=(Cent*5/9) + 32

4. Write a Java program that prints the perimeter of a rectangle given its
   height and width. 
    perimeter = 2 * (width + height)

5. Write a program that converts kilometers per hour to miles per hour.
     miles = (kilometer  * 0.6213712)

6. Swap two numbers without using a third variable. 

Assignment List: (if..else if..else) 	

7.Write a Java program to enter three numbers and print maximum number.

8. While purchasing certain items, a discount of 10% is offered 
if the quantity purchased is more than 1000. If quantity and price 
per item are input through the keyboard, 

9. write a program to calculate the total expenses. 

10.Write a Java program to handle the above situation.

11.The current year and the year in which the employee joined the organization
are entered through the keyboard. If the number of years for which the employee has served the organization is greater than 3 then a 
bonus of Rs. 25000/- is given to the employee. If the years of service are not greater than 3, 
then the program should do nothing. Write a Java program to handle above situation.

12.Write a program to input a character from user and print whether it is vowel or consonant

Assignment List: (Loop)

13.Write a Java program to input a number and a digit and count & print number of times the digit occurs in number.

14.Write a Java program to print reverse of a entered number.

15.Write a menu driven program to build a calculator as shown below. 
				MENU
	1.	Addition
	2.	Subtraction
	3.	Multiplication
	4.	Division
	5.	Power
	6.	Exit.

16.Accept a choice from the user and perform the operation. Display the answer. 
(Hint: use do..while and switch .. case structure)

17. Write a Java program to accept a number n and print 
sum of squares of all numbers from 1 to n.

