DevOps focuses on creating a collaborative environment where software can become more user-centric. It’s not just about speeding up the development lifecycle, it’s also about improving the overall quality of software. That’s probably why it’s best to describe DevOps as a mindset, rather than just a tool that fast-tracks development.

DevOps strives to combine the expertise of operations and development engineers, from the design process all the way up to production release and support.
Under some DevOps models, the merging of development and operations teams also includes a tighter integration of quality assurance and security teams. The result of such intensive integration is that a lot of the errors born out of isolated activities (such as testing and deployment) are done away with.
DevOps teams use practices to automate processes and tooling that helps operate and evolve applications faster and with greater reliability. Thanks to DevOps, a team’s overall productivity and velocity are pushed to the limits . This leads to greater benefits way, beyond a company’s margins.


Benefits of DevOps

Speed

Speed is definitely one of DevOps must coveted benefits. It allows businesses to push the pedal to the metal when it comes to functionality.
Faster software release means businesses can make use of the value of the product features. Everyone knows that product testing — necessary as it is — is also very time-consuming. With DevOps, a firm can speed up the process of delivery and modifications via automated integration and testing.
Not only that, but there’s also an entire team of developers who can keep a close watch on a product throughout its lifecycle. This constant surveillance reduces the time it generally takes teams to locate and fix errors and bugs.

Reliability

The good thing about a competitive market is that quality will always end up trumping quantity. That’s why software quality is worth its weight in proverbial gold.
Quality and reliability are two things DevOps can bring to the table. DevOps helps streamline the way a business performs its software testing — rather than testing being one part of the SDLC, DevOps elevates it to be a crucial, over-arching component throughout the SDLC.
On the other hand, reliability allows a system to function continuously within its ambient limitations, which in turn promotes the overall connectivity of services required for the seamless operation of a business.




Improved collaboration

The thing is, it’s not like people didn’t realize that consolidating development, operations, and QA teams would bring further value to a business before DevOps culture took off.
However, even then previous software methodologies were missing out on a major element — collaboration. What DevOps did was bring collaboration between departments to the forefront and changed how such units interacted with each other.
We all know that DevOps is an improvement over agile and lean software methodologies, so it’s not surprising that DevOps naturally highlights operations too. In a DevOps environment, teams don’t exist on their own separate plain, and department-specific objectives go out the window.
The great thing about collaboration under a DevOps model is that the focus switches from team efficiency to combined overall performance — because accountability for the end product is shared by all. Furthermore, the increased interaction between the Dev, Ops, and QA teams has another immeasurable advantage in the form of technical upgrades.
Think about it, when members of different departments work together regularly, they share ideas and expertise. In a way, they’re being cross-trained in all matters that don’t relate to specializations. That’s like having your cake and eating it— which, as you know, is the whole point of having cake!


Security
Security is a big thing when it comes to IT. It doesn’t matter if your product line is working at warp speed if you’re dealing with compromised data protection.
But here’s some good news. Apart from all the other advantages that DevOps can offer companies, it can also help strengthen security. It does this by adding security as a separate element to the components of development and operations and thus transforming itself to — DevSecOps.
Under DevSecOps the responsibility of security doesn’t fall to one team, rather everyone is responsible for safety and defense. Not only does DevSecOps help reduce costs, but it also helps you detect and tackle security issues early.



Why Does DevOps Matter?
Asking why DevOps matters is like asking why more is always more. That’s just how the equation plays out. But if all my efforts listing the benefits of DevOps haven’t convinced you, I’ll just have to try again.
There’s no doubt that the world has changed. Software and the internet have modified our lives in just about every way you can imagine. Software is no longer a supplementary component, instead, it’s an integral part of every business.
Companies use software to reach their customers through apps and services and to streamline the way they do business — be it logistics, operations, or communications. As far as software is concerned, the implementation eventualities are limitless.
In a time where everything is becoming computerized, software is the key to all innovations. And, DevOps is what differentiates between good software and great software!


DevOps Practices

Continuous integration (CI)

One of the biggest problems resulting from teams working in isolation is that merging code when work is completed. It’s not only challenging but also time-consuming. That’s where continuous integration (CI) can help big time.
Developers generally make use of a shared repository (using a version control system such as Git.) with continuous integration. The fact that a continuous integration service simultaneously builds and runs tests on code changes makes it easier to recognize and handle errors. In the long run, continuous integration can help boost developer productivity, address bugs and errors faster, and it can help speed up updates.

Continuous delivery

CD is all about compilation, testing, and the staging environment. This stage of the development lifecycle expands on CI by extending code changes to a testing environment (or a production environment) after the build stage.
If employed correctly, CD can help developers finetune updates by thorough testing across multiple dimensions before the production stage. Continuous Delivery allows developers to run tests such as UI testing, integration testing, and load testing, etc.


Microservices

Microservices are to software design what production lines are to manufacturing. Or, to put it more verbosely, microservices is a software design architecture that takes a hammer to monolithic systems.
Microservices allows applications to be built altogether in one big code repository. Each application consists of multiple microservices and every service is tweaked to excel at one specific function.
For example, let’s look at how Amazon decided to move to microservices. Once upon a time, when Amazon wasn’t the behemoth it is today, their API served them just fine. But as their popularity grew so did their need for a better application program interface.
Amazon decided to get into microservices. Now, instead of a problematic two-tiered architecture, Amazon has multiple services — one that deals with orders, one service that generates their recommended buys list, a payment service, etc. All these services are actually mini-applications with a single business capability.


nfrastructure as code

Thanks to technological innovations, servers and critical infrastructure no longer function the way they did a decade ago. Now, you have cloud providers like Google, that manage business infrastructure for thousands upon thousands of customers in huge data warehouses.
Unsurprisingly, the way engineers manage infrastructure today is way different than what went on previously. And, Infrastructure as Code (IaC) is one of the practices that a DevOps environment may apply to handle a shift in scale.
Under IaC, infrastructure is managed using software development techniques and code (such as version control, etc). Developers can interact with infrastructure programmatically thanks to the cloud’s API-driven model. This allows engineers to handle infrastructure the way they’d tackle application code.
This is important because it allows you to test your infrastructure the same way you would test your code. With IaC at the helm, your system administrators don’t have to stress about issues like the webserver not connecting to the database, etc.
What’s more, IaC can help businesses auto-provision and shape abstraction layers so that developers can go on building services without needing to know the specific hardware, GPU, firmware, and so on, if they have a DevOps team that’s developing infrastructure to push automation forward.
Picture this: Big-time car manufacturers like Mercedes Benz, BMW, and Audi all want to get their hands on the latest in-car experience technologies, right? But if these companies want to ship new services and products they’re going to struggle with the fact everyone on the road has different hardware.
Unless one fine day, the powers that be decide to have universal hardware, edge case devices will continue to act as roadblocks when it comes to development. However, this is where a solid DevOps team can help because they can auto-provision abstraction layers to automate infrastructure services. By solving edge-case challenges in the cloud, a DevOps team can help auto-manufacturers by cutting down costs, and help lessen the burden and strain on developers.



Communication and collaboration

One of the fundamental cultural aspects of DevOps is communication and collaboration. DevOps tooling and automation (of the software delivery process) focuses on creating collaboration by combining the processes and efficiencies of development and operations.
In a DevOps environment, all teams involved work to build cultural norms relating to information sharing and facilitating communication via project tracking systems, chat applications, and so on. This allows quicker communication between developers and helps bring together all parts of an organization to accomplish set goals and projects.

